# Computer Science Student

### Professional Self-Assessment

Completing the coursework throughout this program and developing my ePortfolio has helped me to showcase my strengths, shape my professional goals and values, and prepare me to enter or become more employable in the computer science field. Throughout this program, I have completed a full software development cycle. I was able to showcase my ability to collaborate in a team environment through my code review. I analyzed the existing code, discovered bugs, and proposed fixes and enhancements to implement that would result in better functionality. In this program as well as previous courses, I have created professional-quality written and visual communications such as well-developed plans and designs for mock companies. By identifying issues and proposing enhancements to my previous code, I have shown that I am able to communicate with potential stakeholders by proposing and implementing solutions that add value and accomplishing industry-specific goals. My code throughout this program and previous courses contains contextual in-code comments that are easily readable and understandable, fostering a collaborative environment. I have also been able to showcase my strengths in data structures and algorithms and my understanding of big O notation. For example, in my second enhancement I replaced the existing ArrayLists with dictionaries and used a function to compare their lookup times. I then explained why dictionaries increased performance compared to ArrayLists through big O notation. In previous courses, I have analyzed and compared other data structures such as Binary search trees and linked lists. This shows that I can design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices. I have also been able to showcase my strengths in software design and engineering. I have experience with multiple languages such as C++, Java, JavaScript, Python, and SQL. For example, in my first enhancement I transferred the existing project from Java to Python, showing that I am flexible and adaptable to language choice. Throughout this program and my education, I have developed a security mindset. I can address potential design flaws in software architecture during the requirements phase. In my initial code review, I addressed that data in the original program was not persistent and is only stored in memory. In my third enhancement, I created a database to ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources.

The following artifacts contain my original program from a previous course as well as three enhanced versions. The three enhanced versions of this program will showcase the full range of my computer science talents and abilities through software design and engineering, algorithms and data structure, and databases. The original program is a rescue animal management program written in Java. In my first enhancement, I transferred the project from Java into Python. In my second enhancement, I utilized dictionaries to improve the lookup times of the program. In my third enhancement, I created a database with SQLite to store animal records. 


### Enhancement 1 - Software Design and Engineering

- This artifact is a Java program designed for rescue animals. It allows the user to intake new rescue dogs and monkeys into the program. The user can then change the reserve status of an animal, print a list of all dogs, print a list of all monkeys, and print a list of all animals that are in-service and not reserved. It was created in my IT-145 class at the beginning of 2023. 
- I selected this artifact to include in my ePortfolio for a few reasons. This is a simple program, and I believe that the enhancements I have made and have yet to make will showcase my improvement in the field. For example, in this enhancement I have transferred this program into another language. This enhancement shows that I am familiar with syntax and the best practices of multiple languages. I believe that this is an important skill for developers to have. I also improved input validation in this enhancement. While testing the original artifact and the enhancement, I noticed that the program would crash when the user input something other than true or false for the reserved status of an animal. I fixed this issue in my enhancement and included better comparisons such as ensuring that user input was converted to lower case and stripped of white space. 
- I did meet the course outcomes that I planned to meet with this enhancement in Module One. I originally believed this enhancement would align with #3 and #4 of the course enhancements. However, after completing this enhancement I believe that it better aligns to #4: Demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals (software engineering/design/database). This enhancement is only a portion of my outcome-coverage plans. I will still need to implement my enhancements for Algorithms and Data Structures, as well as Databases. 
- While enhancing and modifying this artifact, I learned that I need to frequently code in multiple languages to remain familiar with them. I specifically chose to transfer this project to Python as I am rusty with this language. In the few courses I took before this course, I have used Java, C++, JavaScript, and HTML. I was challenged with remembering Python specific syntax and features such as input and inheritance for example. I used an online textbook and problems that I had solved in a previous class that used Python to refresh my memory. These were the main challenges that I faced while working on this enhancement. I was able to fix the input validation of setting the reserve status fairly easily. 


### Enhancement 2 - Algorithms and Data Structures

- This artifact is the same artifact that I used for my first enhancement. It was originally a program written in Java designed for rescue animals. It allows the user to intake new rescue dogs and monkeys into the program. The user can then change the reserve status of an animal, print a list of all dogs, print a list of all monkeys, and print a list of all animals that are in-service and not reserved. The artifact was created in my IT-145 class at the beginning of 2023. 
- As I stated in my previous narrative, I selected this artifact to include in my ePortfolio because I felt like this was a program that I could build upon and improve in all three enhancement categories. Specific components such as the usage of a dictionary instead of a list as well as the various search functions showcase my skills and abilities in algorithms and data structure. Replacing lists with dictionaries has significantly improved the performance of my artifact, especially when the program contains an exceptionally large number of records. For testing purposes, I created functions to assess the lookup times of both data structures. The enhanced artifact containing dictionaries is approximately 243 times faster than the artifact containing lists. This is because a list is a linear search O(n) compared to a constant search O(1). I have also included screenshots showing the performance increase. The artifact further improved by adding functions to populate the dictionaries with more test records, as well as functions to search for an animal by name, dogs by breed, and monkeys by species. 
- I did meet the course outcomes that I planned to meet with this enhancement in Module One. I believe this enhancement best aligns with #3 of the computer science program outcomes: Design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices (data structures and algorithms). I believe this enhancement can also align with #4 as this solution is far more scalable than before, delivering value and accomplishing industry-specific goals. I am working hard to meet my outcome-coverage plans. I will need to apply polish and feedback from this enhancement before adding it to my ePortfolio and will then finish my final database enhancement. 
- While enhancing and modifying the artifact, I refreshed my memory on the usage of dictionaries. I referred to a program that I wrote in a previous class. It was a text-based game that used dictionaries to move the player around the map. I also learned how to test the lookup time of each data structure. This was a challenge for me as I had never tested the performance difference between data structures before. With a few Google searches, I learned to use the built in Python function timeit. I then populated the lists and dictionaries with 10000 records and tested the functions I wrote utilizing timeit to calculate the lookup time of dogs with random names.


### Enhancement 3 - Databases

- This artifact is the same artifact that I used for in my previous two enhancements. It was originally a program written in Java designed for rescue animals. It allows the user to intake new rescue dogs and monkeys into the program. The user can then change the reserve status of an animal, print a list of all dogs, print a list of all monkeys, and print a list of all animals that are in-service and not reserved. The artifact was created in my IT-145 class at the beginning of 2023.
- I selected this artifact to include in my ePortfolio to showcase my skills in all three enhancement categories. I felt like this artifact was a great foundation to build upon and needed improvement. Specific components such as the usage of SQLite showcase my skills and abilities with databases and queries. In the original artifact animals are stored in memory which is not very useful in a real-world application as this solution is more appropriate for testing purposes. In this enhancement, I utilized SQLite to store the animals in a database and created various queries to improve the original functionality. For example, I created additional queries to allow the user to search for an animal by name, search for and display dogs by breed, search for and display monkeys by species, and the ability to remove an animal from the database. 
- I did meet the course outcomes that I planned to meet with this enhancement in Module One. I believe this enhancement aligns with #5 of the Computer Science program outcomes: Develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources. This enhancement mitigates the design flaws of the original artifact and enhances the security of data and resources. I have now met the third, fourth, and fifth Computer Science program outcomes that I aimed to meet in Module One. 
- While enhancing and modifying the artifact, I learned a lot about SQLite. While I have used MySQL and NoSQL in the past, I have never used SQLite before. I found it interesting to implement a solution that I have not used before, especially in conjunction with Python. I also refreshed my memory and learned how to utilize multiple types of queries together. While this enhancement works well, I did face challenges. I originally wanted to utilize MySQL to create an interface for the artifact, but I became concerned about others trying to connect to my MySQL server. I would have to share the details of my server which could become a security issue, and my computer would have to remain on with the server running for anyone else to test my program. I also ran into multiple different issues in attempting to create the interface so I thought it would be best to scrap the idea and utilize SQLite as it is easy to share the database since it is stored in a file. I also ran into some issues with the creation of my queries as I am unfamiliar with SQLite and have not written a query in some time. I was able to overcome these challenges by utilizing SQLite’s documentation on the official website. 
